Uniform Resource Identifier (URI): Generic Syntax - RFC 3986 (excerpts)

1. Introduction

A Uniform Resource Identifier (URI) provides a simple and extensible
means for identifying a resource. This specification of URI syntax and
semantics is derived from concepts introduced by the World Wide Web
global information initiative.

A URI is an identifier consisting of a sequence of characters matching
the syntax rule named "URI". It enables uniform identification of
resources via a set of naming schemes.

1.1.1. Generic Syntax

Each URI begins with a scheme name that refers to a specification for
assigning identifiers within that scheme. As such, the URI syntax is a
federated and extensible naming system wherein each scheme's
specification may further restrict the syntax and semantics of
identifiers using that scheme.

The generic URI syntax consists of a hierarchical sequence of components
referred to as the scheme, authority, path, query, and fragment.

     URI         = scheme ":" hier-part [ "?" query ] [ "#" fragment ]

     hier-part   = "//" authority path-abempty
                 / path-absolute
                 / path-rootless
                 / path-empty

3.1. Scheme

Each URI begins with a scheme name that refers to a specification for
assigning identifiers within that scheme. Scheme names consist of a
sequence of characters beginning with a letter and followed by any
combination of letters, digits, plus ("+"), period ("."), or hyphen
("-"). Scheme names are case-insensitive, but the canonical form is
lowercase.

3.2. Authority

The authority component is preceded by a double slash ("//") and is
terminated by the next slash ("/"), question mark ("?"), or number sign
("#") character, or by the end of the URI.

Many URI schemes include a hierarchical element for a naming authority
so that governance of the name space defined by the remainder of the URI
is delegated to that authority. The generic syntax provides a common
means for distinguishing an authority based on a registered name or
server address, along with optional port and user information.

     authority   = [ userinfo "@" ] host [ ":" port ]

3.3. Path

The path component contains data, usually organized in hierarchical
form, that, along with data in the non-hierarchical query component,
serves to identify a resource within the scope of the URI's scheme and
naming authority (if any). The path is terminated by the first question
mark ("?") or number sign ("#") character, or by the end of the URI.

3.4. Query

The query component contains non-hierarchical data that, along with data
in the path component, serves to identify a resource within the scope of
the URI's scheme and naming authority (if any). The query component is
indicated by the first question mark ("?") character and terminated by a
number sign ("#") character or by the end of the URI.

3.5. Fragment

The fragment identifier component of a URI allows indirect identification
of a secondary resource by reference to a primary resource and
additional identifying information. The fragment is indicated by the
presence of a number sign ("#") character and terminated by the end of
the URI.

5. Relative Resolution

Relative URI references are resolved against a base URI. The base URI is
established according to a set of rules that prefer an embedded base,
then the URI of the encapsulating entity, then a retrieval-context URI.
