Transmission Control Protocol - RFC 793 (excerpts)

1. INTRODUCTION

The Transmission Control Protocol (TCP) is intended to provide a
reliable host-to-host protocol between hosts in packet-switched computer
communication networks, and in interconnected systems of such networks.

TCP is a connection-oriented, end-to-end reliable protocol designed to
fit into a layered hierarchy of protocols which support multi-network
applications. TCP provides for reliable inter-process communication
between pairs of processes in host computers attached to distinct but
interconnected computer communication networks.

2. THE TCP RELIABILITY MECHANISM

TCP recovers from data that is damaged, lost, duplicated, or delivered
out of order by the internet communication system. This is achieved by
assigning a sequence number to each octet transmitted, and requiring a
positive acknowledgment (ACK) from the receiving TCP. If the ACK is not
received within a timeout interval, the data is retransmitted.

The TCP must recover from data that is damaged, lost, duplicated, or
delivered out of order. Sequence numbers and acknowledgments provide
this. Checksums detect damage. Duplicate segments are discarded.
Out-of-order segments are reordered using sequence numbers.

3. THREE-WAY HANDSHAKE

The procedures used to establish and delete connections utilize the
control flags SYN and ACK and the fields for sequence and acknowledgment
numbers.

To establish a connection, one TCP transmits a SYN segment, the other
responds with a SYN and an ACK of the SYN, and the first TCP then ACKs
the SYN from the other. This is called the three-way handshake.

A connection progresses through a series of states: LISTEN, SYN-SENT,
SYN-RECEIVED, ESTABLISHED, FIN-WAIT-1, FIN-WAIT-2, CLOSE-WAIT,
CLOSING, LAST-ACK, TIME-WAIT, and the fictional state CLOSED.

ESTABLISHED is the normal state for the data transfer phase of the
connection. CLOSED is fictional because it represents the state when
there is no TCB, and therefore, no connection.

4. FLOW CONTROL

TCP provides a means for the receiver to govern the amount of data sent
by the sender. This is achieved by returning a "window" with every ACK
indicating a range of acceptable sequence numbers beyond the last
segment successfully received. The window indicates an allowed number of
octets that the sender may transmit before receiving further permission.

5. PORTS AND MULTIPLEXING

To allow for many processes within a single Host to use TCP
communication facilities simultaneously, the TCP provides a set of
addresses or ports within each host. Concatenated with the network and
host addresses from the internet communication layer, this forms a
socket. A pair of sockets uniquely identifies each connection.

A TCP connection is defined by a pair of sockets. A socket is the
combination of an IP address and a TCP port number.

6. URGENT DATA

The objective of the TCP urgent mechanism is to allow the sending user
to stimulate the receiving user to accept some urgent data and to permit
the receiving TCP to indicate to the receiving user when all the
currently known urgent data has been received by the user.
