Internet Protocol - RFC 791 (excerpts)

1. INTRODUCTION

The Internet Protocol is designed for use in interconnected systems of
packet-switched computer communication networks. The internet protocol
provides for transmitting blocks of data called datagrams from sources
to destinations, where sources and destinations are hosts identified by
fixed length addresses. The internet protocol also provides for
fragmentation and reassembly of long datagrams, if necessary, for
transmission through small packet networks.

The internet protocol is specifically limited in scope to provide the
functions necessary to deliver a package of bits (an internet datagram)
from a source to a destination over an interconnected system of
networks. There are no mechanisms to augment end-to-end data
reliability, flow control, sequencing, or other services commonly found
in host-to-host protocols. The internet protocol can capitalize on the
services of its supporting networks to provide various types and
qualities of service.

3. SPECIFICATION

3.1 Internet Header Format

A summary of the contents of the internet header follows:

Version: 4 bits
The Version field indicates the format of the internet header. This
document describes version 4 of the internet protocol (IPv4).

IHL: 4 bits
Internet Header Length is the length of the internet header in 32 bit
words, and thus points to the beginning of the data. The minimum value
for a correct header is 5 (20 octets).

Type of Service: 8 bits
The Type of Service provides an indication of the abstract parameters of
the quality of service desired. These parameters are to be used to guide
the selection of the actual service parameters when transmitting a
datagram through a particular network.

Total Length: 16 bits
Total Length is the length of the datagram, measured in octets,
including internet header and data. This field allows the length of a
datagram to be up to 65,535 octets.

Identification: 16 bits
An identifying value assigned by the sender to aid in assembling the
fragments of a datagram.

Flags: 3 bits
Various Control Flags. Bit 0 is reserved and must be zero. Bit 1 is the
Don't Fragment (DF) flag. Bit 2 is the More Fragments (MF) flag.

Fragment Offset: 13 bits
This field indicates where in the original datagram this fragment
belongs. The fragment offset is measured in units of 8 octets (64 bits).

Time to Live: 8 bits
This field indicates the maximum time the datagram is allowed to remain
in the internet system. If this field contains the value zero, then the
datagram must be destroyed. The time is measured in units of seconds,
but since every module that processes a datagram must decrease the TTL
by at least one even if it process the datagram in less than a second,
the TTL must be thought of only as an upper bound on the time a datagram
may exist.

Protocol: 8 bits
This field indicates the next level protocol used in the data portion of
the internet datagram. The values for various protocols are specified in
Assigned Numbers (for example, 6 for TCP and 17 for UDP).

Header Checksum: 16 bits
A checksum on the header only. Since some header fields change (e.g.,
time to live), this is recomputed and verified at each point that the
internet header is processed.

Source Address: 32 bits
The source address. An IPv4 address is a 32-bit value, typically written
in dotted-decimal notation such as 192.0.2.1.

Destination Address: 32 bits
The destination address.

3.2 Discussion

The internet protocol implements two basic functions: addressing and
fragmentation. The internet modules use the addresses carried in the
internet header to transmit the internet datagram toward the
destination. The selection of a path for transmission is called routing.

The internet protocol treats each internet datagram as an independent
entity unrelated to any other internet datagram. There are no
connections or logical circuits (virtual or otherwise).
