HTTP Semantics - RFC 9110 (excerpts)

1. Introduction

The Hypertext Transfer Protocol (HTTP) is a stateless application-level
protocol for distributed, collaborative, hypertext information systems.
This document describes the architecture of HTTP, defines the "http" and
"https" URI schemes, defines HTTP methods, status codes, and header
fields, and defines representation data.

HTTP is a request/response protocol that operates by exchanging messages
across a connection. An HTTP client is a program that establishes a
connection to a server for the purpose of sending one or more HTTP
requests. An HTTP server is a program that accepts connections in order
to service HTTP requests by sending HTTP responses.

2. Methods

The request method token is the primary source of request semantics; it
indicates the purpose for which the client has made this request and
what is expected by the client as a successful result.

GET: The GET method requests transfer of a current selected
representation for the target resource. GET is the primary mechanism of
information retrieval. A payload within a GET request message has no
defined semantics.

HEAD: The HEAD method is identical to GET except that the server MUST
NOT send content in the response. HEAD is used for obtaining metadata
without transferring the representation data.

POST: The POST method requests that the target resource process the
representation enclosed in the request according to the resource's own
specific semantics. POST is used for creating resources, submitting
forms, and posting messages.

PUT: The PUT method requests that the state of the target resource be
created or replaced with the state defined by the representation
enclosed in the request message content.

DELETE: The DELETE method requests that the origin server remove the
association between the target resource and its current functionality.

3. Status Codes

The status code of a response is a three-digit integer code giving the
result of the attempt to understand and satisfy the request.

1xx (Informational): the request was received, continuing process.
2xx (Successful): the request was successfully received, understood, and
accepted.
3xx (Redirection): further action needs to be taken in order to complete
the request.
4xx (Client Error): the request contains bad syntax or cannot be
fulfilled.
5xx (Server Error): the server failed to fulfill an apparently valid
request.

200 OK: the request has succeeded. The content sent in a 200 response
depends on the request method.

404 Not Found: the origin server did not find a current representation
for the target resource or is not willing to disclose that one exists.

500 Internal Server Error: the server encountered an unexpected
condition that prevented it from fulfilling the request.

4. HTTPS

The "https" URI scheme is defined for use with HTTP over TLS. The https
scheme uses TCP port 443 as the default port. The "http" URI scheme uses
TCP port 80 as the default port.

An origin is defined by the scheme, host, and port of a URI. Two URIs
have the same origin if they share scheme, host, and port.

5. Representations

A representation is information that is intended to reflect a past,
current, or desired state of a given resource, in a format that can be
readily communicated via the protocol. A representation consists of
representation metadata and a potentially unbounded stream of
representation data (the content).

Content-Type indicates the media type of the content. Content-Encoding
indicates content codings applied to the content.
